Speaker 1: Okay welcome everyone to the 2016 Folklife Festival! Welcome to the "On the Move" tent, where we have sessions every hour on the hour. And it's our privilege today to welcome Debbie Wong and Great Lee.
[SILENCE]
Speaker 2: Good morning everyone-- [[aside]] now it is-- Great to see all of you; you are the hardcore.
Speaker 2: You know it's a gray day, right? It's a gray day. It's still fairly early-- really glad you're here.
Speaker 2: I've been at the festival for a few days now, and I can say that this space,
Speaker 2: this tent as it were, there have been some amazing conversations going on in here.
Speaker 2: And this is the "On the Move" space, where migration and movement is being discussed.
Speaker 2: And in a way, this tent is the connector between the two big themes of the the festival, right? The sounds of California and Basque identity.
Speaker 2: So, we are going to be talking today about Japanese American identity, which is the not the same thing as Japanese identity.
Speaker 2: It has to do with immigration and with some, you know, spectacularly violent moments in American history, as well.
Speaker 2: But we'll come to that down the line in just a bit.
Speaker 2: Now, listen. I think it's very important in this space, in particular, for us to talk with you, as well.
Speaker 2: So if you have questions or responses as we go along, I say raise your hand and speak up. I think that would be great, okay?
Speaker 2: The last few days of spending time with my friends, and my colleagues and my peers here, has been one of my great life experiences.
Speaker 2: Let me very very quickly introduce you to the panelists. Elaine Fukumoto, on the end, who is a Taiko player and a dance teacher.
Speaker 2: And please comment either 1:15 or 4:15 to hear us do our thing, which is a project called-
Speaker 2: and Elaine is leading the dance in that. Next to her is Nobuko Miyamoto, legendary singer from the Asian American movement years of the 70s especially, but she didn't stop after the 1970s.
Speaker 2: And she is the heart and soul of our project, the creator of the FandangObon Project.
Speaker 2: Next to her, George Abe. Extraordinary musician; well-known in the Japanese community of southern California, and frankly far beyond for his work as a musician,
Speaker 2: and the original- One of the originating Taiko ensembles in the United States, Kinnara Taiko, out of Senshin Buddhist Temple.
Speaker 2: He is also known for his drumming in Obon ceremonies or festivals in the summertime. He is a bon taiko player in short.
Speaker 2: Next to him is Nancy Sekizawa - "Atomic Nancy".
Speaker 2: If you are looking at the Smithsonian blog for the festival, which I hope you are because it's pretty fantastic, there is a great profile of Nancy there, just posted this morning, so it's right at the top of the blog right now.
Speaker 2: If you really want to know what's going on with this woman, read that profile; it's going to blow your mind. It's like super interesting; her history is so interesting. I expect some of that will come out as we proceed.
Speaker 2: Next to me is Sean Miura, who is very much a community activist; I would even say community agitator in a really great way; in a productive way in terms of the art.
Speaker 2: And that too will come out as we proceed. He is a shamisen player. He has-  I don't even know how to describe you, because you do so many things, and it all connects in a way that I want to come forward as we talk today.
Speaker 2: Let's start with some straightforward matters. What generation are each of you?
Speaker 2: Surely you know that in a context of immigration and migration, what generation you are matters very, very much indeed.
Speaker 2: In Ethnic Studies, we say the first generation are the folks who emigrated from someplace else to here, in this case, which would be the United States.
Speaker 2: Second generation are the children of those original migrants. Right? Now, third generation, and so on.
Speaker 2: I think we also know that often generations of [[?]]-
Speaker 1: Question. So it's important to get that out here, with um the relevant generations within the Japanese-American experience.
Speaker 1: Uh, we're going to have to hand this mic around so, so, - Oh, good. There's two. What generation are each of you and, and, explain the Japanese terms for generation as we go along?
Speaker 2: Ok, I am third generation. My grandparents came to, uh, from Hiroshima, Japan.
Speaker 2: My parents were special niseis, they were kibei niseis, so they were born here, so they're citizens, but they went back to Japan, to be educated.
Speaker 2: So my, my mom went back as an infant, and came back to get married. My dad left at about 9, and came back at the age of 18.
Speaker 2: So that's what uh, kibei nisei is then. And I'm just a regular Sansei; third-generation.
Speaker 3: Hi, I'm a Sansei, third-generation, sort of a mixed-blood. My grandmother was a Mormon uh, uh, American. And my other grandmother was a picture bride.
Speaker 3: But I call myself uh, uh, Japanese-American Sansei. But you know what? Can I do something?
Speaker 3: I want everybody, just in the, in the house here, just to say what generation they are, because I just like to know.
Speaker 3: Can we start with you? Well, you don't know right? How many generations your people have been in this country?
[[People talking in the background]]
Speaker 3: 3? 5? 4? 3? 2? 4? Huh 7? [[Laughter]] Ok long time. 6? In the back row there? 5 or 6? 1? Aha. So, ok, that's all.
Speaker 4: I'm nisei and a half.
Speaker 1: My mother was kibei, which means she was born in Orange, California, went back to Japan, and about the fourth-  which is usually about the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Came back to the United States when she was about 26, and so, culturally I'm two and a half. So I speak a little Japanese. She was a Japanese school teacher, and generationally, I like to say, I am two and a half. [[speaks Japanese]].
Speaker 2: I'm third generation-  Parents born in-  My father was born in Whitefish, Montana, and then my mother was born in Kemmerer, Wyoming, but got their education in Japan, and came back.
Speaker 3: I am three and three-quarters generation, but I say that I am fourth generation [[speaks Japanese]],
Speaker 3: just to sort of provide a little bit of context as to why we are saying "generations", because I think that's- In many other communities that's not something you talk about often.
Speaker 3: For people of color, like, policy, and history, and waves of immigration really affect our generational cultures,
Speaker 3: and the way that we're perceived, and the way that we perceive the country, and the world.
Speaker 3: So with that with each generation has come different challenges, and different strengths, and different victories.
Speaker 3: So it's, it's as we talk more, you'll get a better sense of that I think.
Speaker 4: Yeah. Yeah. One of the things that Asian Americans have to deal with constantly is often based strictly on terms of what our faces look like,
Speaker 4: not being regarded as being fully American or you know of the U.S. Right?
Speaker 4: So what we often have to explain is what it means to be Japanese-American or Chinese-American, which is not the same as being Japanese. Right?
Speaker 4: However, we carry traces of of the home country in all kinds of ways through our family life. And very quickly, I wonder do each of you have Japanese names?
Speaker 4: And I'm not going to say in addition to your "American names", but rather, what is the interaction be-
Speaker 1: Since I'm holding the mic my name is Tezuo in Japanese. Kind of means, ah, never mind.
Unknown Speaker: what does it mean?
1: Well, long story short, it means like iron, the characters are like iron, and having, you know, strength, those kind of things.
Speaker 2: Most of my very young life I was Joanne.
Speaker 2: I didn't even know that I had a Japanese name because I'm a post-war- Well, no. I'm a pre-war baby.
Speaker 2: I was born just before the beginning of the war, so we were busy trying to be American.
Speaker 2: So they gave me "Joanne" was my name, and only after I was in the Asian-American movement,
Speaker 2: in the late 60's and early 70's, did I claim, reclaim my Japanese name, which is "Nobuko", and that's all I use now.
Speaker 3: Most of my Japanese-American, "JA" friends; their middle name is Japanese,
Speaker 3: but my father thought I was Japanese first, so my first name is "Mariko", and my middle name is "Elaine". And my father got my middle name off of a radio program. [[laughter]]
Speaker 2: Actually, that's true with me too, my first name is "Nobuko" on my birth certificate, and my middle name was "Joanne".
Speaker 1: My first name is George like George Washington. Everybody wanted their kids to be the president of the United States. [[Laughter]]
So my middle name is really interesting, it's-  Most of the girls have a "k-o" - "ko" - like "Machiko", "Michiko", "Nobuko".
" So my father's first name, they took the first syllable of my father's name, which is "Minotu"-- "Mi", and the first syllable of my mothers' name, which is "Ito". So Mi-I-ko. So that's my name, "Miiko".
Speaker 5: so um, my name - my first name is Sean, and my middle name is Takeo, which comes from my grandfather.
Speaker 5: Just to give you a little bit -  There is actually a story behind it, for any [[?]], that's related to immigration. So my great great grandfather immigrated from [[Golka?]] to mine in Utah, and he immigrated without papers.
Speaker 5: So, he came through Mexico, which was very common back then. So, in our family there was a single character that was passed down from generation to generation, from male to male,
Speaker 5: kinda like how you have like "James", like "James, Sr.", "James, Jr.", the III, the IV, and so on.
Speaker 5: We'll take that one character and pass that character down. So like :[["Sakamon", "Sakuichi", and "Sakui"?]].
Speaker 5: And then when we got to America, because my great great grandfather was so ashamed that he had come over without papers, he had his son and when he had his first child, my grandfather, he had him change his name completely and take that character out.
Speaker 5: So that's how he became "Takeo". And so my grandfather was actually born on the fourth of July, so his name was given as [[?]], "Happy Birthday to Sean's grandfather".
Speaker 5: And so he born on the fourth of July, so his father gave him a Japanese name, and the doctor said, "Well, no one is going to be able to say that, so let's name him "Paul" after Paul Revere.
Speaker 5: [[Laughter]] So his name is Paul Takeo Bannai, [[Laughter]] which is-  And so "Takeo" means "warrior", like "warrior-dude", kinda "warrior-man", which is funny because my grandfather not only became a soldier, cause of warrior Takio, but became a [[?]] Republican politician in California, so the first Japanese-American Assemblyman.
Speaker 5: So, the names kinda have power, yeah. [[shout]] Wow! -
Speaker 1: Wow! I did not know that and that's like, that is fantastic!
Speaker 1: Oh wow, um, and I should say I'm actually Chinese American,
Speaker 1: I'm actually also multi-ethnic. Hey did you know that it's possible to have more than one self-identity?
Speaker 1: Are you, I mean have you gone down that path yet? [Laughs]] [[Background talking]] Yeah, yeah, yeah, right. Got any pure people out there?
Speaker 1: Alright, yeah right, exactly, I'm half white-American which in my case is a mixture of Scottish and German,
Speaker 1: the other half of me is Chinese, specifically from the Guangdong or the Taishan area of southern China.
Speaker 1: And I do have a Chinese name. My grandmother was very careful to make that happen.
Speaker 1: All of my cousins have Chinese names. I'm really distracted by that in a great way. Next question from my friends here.
Speaker 1: When do you feel most Japanese-American, and I mean Japanese-American, not Japanese, because none of you are, in fact, Japanese.
Speaker 1: And I'm asking this because, in my opinion, feeling and emotions are not, um, something that are always simply personal, and private, and unique to oneself,
Speaker 1: but I would argue that feelings and emotions are actually very much related to the big rolled-up power of politics and outside forces that shape who we are and what we're able to feel.
Speaker 1: So, here's my question to you. When do you feel most Japanese-American, and I can say that is, you know, I feel most Chinese-American,
Speaker 1: um, in at least two different contexts. One when my father, who died sixteen years ago, would make,
Speaker 1: Jook the day after Thanksgiving every year when he would, this is the part he liked best about thanksgiving,
Speaker 1: he would take the carcass from the turkey and he would boil it for like a day, and the house would smell amazing,
Speaker 1: right? I would feel particularly Chinese-American the day after Thanksgiving. I feel most Asian-American when I'm with other
Speaker 1: Right so, that's my example. When do you feel most Japanese-American?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Uh, yeah, okay. I think the festivals, the Japanese festivals, like we celebrate Obon. Obon is a kind of a festival like the Day of the Dead. You know, celebrating our ancestors; looking back and saying we're gonna dance in joy because we're here because of our ancestors.
Speaker 2: You know. So, it's celebrating that kind of thing. The many different forms that it takes. And really, you know, this Obon festival that we do is a very Japanese-American thing.
Speaker 2: It's not -- they don't do it the same way in Japan. They don't do it the same way.
Speaker 2: For us in a way, it's a, it's a way to celebrate our culture and better, feel better about ourselves.
Speaker 2: You know, we're here in America, and we experience racism and those kind of things, but as a community, when it comes together and you dance together in circles and stuff like that, it's great, yeah.
[SILENCE]
Speaker 3: [[light background music]] I'm, I'm a little confused. How do I feel as a Japanese-American or- [[Cross Talk]]
Speaker 1: No!
Speaker 3: -or when? Or-
Speaker 1: Or when.
Speaker 3: Japanese or Japanese-American?
Speaker 1: Or where?
Speaker 1: Japanese-American [[/Cross Talk]]
Speaker 3: No, what's the difference there?
[[Numerous people talking at once]] OH!
Speaker 1: OH! OK! YEAH! Give it right back to me, there. [[Laughs]]
Speaker 1: Yeah. I'll let you pursue that as you like. I have no, no, no skin in the game of trying to like put people into categories. That's not my intent.
Speaker 3: I think being and why we're here, performing and sharing the culture, that's when I feel Japanese, or Japanese-American.
Speaker 3: So I am taking this part of me; my Japanese-American, Japanese part of me and sharing it with the public.
Speaker 1: I go sharing that Japanese part of me, with the general public.
[[Background conversation]]
Speaker 2: I was born, you know, in West Los Angeles, in a very small Japanese community called "Sawtelle", in West L.A.
Speaker 2: So, feeling the separation of being American or Japanese, when I speak English, and then that's when I feel like I'm Japanese,
Speaker 2: but then identifying myself as Japanese is when I really go down to Little Tokyo, and being around my people.
Speaker 2: So, I grew up probably just feeling- Everyday I feel Japanese-American.
Speaker 2: I mean like, today, I feel Japanese-American,
Speaker 2: exposing some of our culture, sharing some of our culture and our ideas, but speaking English, and to be able to communicate how we feel, is very different.
Speaker 2: It's very different, and I feel quite confident as an Asian woman.
Speaker 2: You know, I think it's more of an Asian woman, but I know my culture is Japanese.
Speaker 2: So, when I go to Little Tokyo, I sit down in a restaurant, I walk around there; that's my playground.
[[Background noise; no speaker]]
Speaker 3: I think that was interesting, the "what's the difference?",
Speaker 3: cause that actually- that does get me going, because I do think that, well, to me, they're very distinct.
Speaker 3: So, I think where I feel- So,, I mean, first off, the answer is that I always feel very Japanese-American.
Speaker 3: Um, so I think it's- I was very lucky to be raised in a generation where difference has been celebrated, to an extent.
Speaker 3: Obviously, we're still facing a lot of, without swearing, messed up things in the world, and obviously we're sort of in this continuous fight for,
Speaker 3: for equality and for just respect on, like, a systemic and social level.
Speaker 3: But, I think I was generally raised within a sense that, yeah, if you're different, and you come from a culture that is "other," quote, unquote, "other" meaning none-mainstream white, generally,
Speaker 3: that that comes with a lot of, of sort of specialness; and like you're able to come to show and tell with whatever you picked off your kitchen table.
Speaker 3: You know, it's like it's cool. Um, but where I think then, I feel the most Japanese-American, where I'm like, "Oh, this is very Japanese-American of me," is when I'm in a moment where I'm saying,
Speaker 3: I'm speaking with somebody, and speaking about something with words that could not be understood contextually by somebody from, who is not Jap- who is not American, who is like, mainstream  white-American.
Speaker 3: Or non-Japanese-American, but could also not be understood by someone from Japan.
Speaker 3: So, like, If I start talking to somebody about Obon, and I just like go up to you and I'm like, "Hey do you want to go down to J-town?"
Speaker 3: "Obon is happening that night, I figured we could stop at [[?]] and grab teriyaki chicken."
Speaker 1: That may sound to you very, very Japanese, but in truth if you said that to a native Japanese person, they'd be like, "I don't know what the hell you're saying right now. Like what, what are these words? Like, why are you butchering our language?"
Speaker 1: So it's, it's- There is this, like, space that we exist in that's different, and I think that's kind of where I feel the most-
Speaker 1: I'm able to feel like, "Oh, that's kinda cool that I can just say that and no people got it. I'll be right there", you know.
Speaker 1: I also feel most Japanese-American when I'm getting compliments, 'cause it's like- I think that's one thing that's gotten passed down, generation to generation. It's like the inability to take compliments,
Speaker 1: is like I feel very uncomfortable when people start calling me, and I start going, "Oh, uh ok," you know.
Speaker 1: Like, no one ever told me to do that, it's just something that I got, I think so.
Speaker 2: Shaun is really good. He, like, breaks it down, you know. [[Laughing]] Anyway, uh, I feel, I'm going to break it down in three levels.
Speaker 2: First, I don't dress like this every day. [[Laughing and comments]] Probably, you know, maybe a couple of three times a year.
Speaker 2: So it's, it's, people are looking at me and this festival like this is my normal way. I don't wear shoes like this. This is not normal for me.
Speaker 2: So I feel, when I'm dressed like this, I feel very Japanese-American. Uh, that's one thing. [[Laughing]]
Speaker 2: The other thing is; I live in a household. I'm, my, um, my child is African-American and Japanese, so I'm always feeling Japanese American.
Speaker 2: My husband, now, is African-American. I live surrounded mostly in an African-American household because my mother-in-law stays there six months out of the year.
Speaker 2: She's 107 years, old born in Ellisville, Mississippi, is, is living in-
Speaker 2: So, I find- There's a big problem I have in communication between what comes out because I am a very high context person, I don't answer questions directly.
Speaker 2: "What do you want to do?" "Oh, what do you want to do?" So I, I defer a lot to people around me-
Speaker 1: Like this! No, no. So, my husband can't stand it. "Just say what you want! Say what you want to do." And I can't, I find myself unable to do that.
Speaker 1: And I'm trying to explain to him this is part of my culture. And he doesn't really understand that. So, that's when I feel very Japanese and, Japanese-American. [[Background noise]]
Speaker 2: Can I add something? [[Background noise]] Uh, I wanna make a point that I think most of us here are more Japanese than the people in Japan.
Speaker 2: The kids in Japan they're learning to play the piano, the violin, and ballet. And here we have young people here learning to play the shamisen and other Japanese instruments. [[Background noise]]
Speaker 2: People in Japan, they don't know how to dress themselves like this, you know. So, they're in awe that we are more Japanese, that, than they are in Japan.
Speaker 2: They are becoming so westernized, and here, we are trying to maintain the culture. And yes, it's a sad thing.
Speaker 2: So, someone's gotta keep it up. [Laughter]
Host: Yeah, yeah. Wow, I'm I'm loving this conversation, and I love the ways in which, you know, the things that each of you raised goes right to the heart of the big questions for this part of the festival, "What is Home?".
Host: It's on the back board there, and that's what I'm pointing at. And what it comes down to is that when and where you feel at home, when and where you are able to feel safe and most fully yourself, most comprehensively yourself,
Host: you know, changes from moment to moment, from place to place, in fact.  And I think it's important to acknowledge that we are not able, especially folks of color in the United States are not able, are not permitted or allowed to feel safe and most fully themselves in all spaces.
Host: Right? You know. I mean- Surely, this is self-evident at that point- at this point.
Host: I have to turn the conversation to the Japanese-American Internment - the E.O. 9066, passed in the early part of 1942.
Host: I expect, but I can't be sure, that all of you know that from 1942 to 1945, all Japanese-Americans and all Japanese, within a certain zone on the west coast, had their civil liberties violated, [[Background noise]]
Host: and between a hundred and ten and a hundred and twenty-five thousand Japanese and Japanese-Americans were put in concentration camps. [[Background noise]]
Speaker 2: I'd like to get you have the sense- [[Background noise continuing throughout]] I know, frankly I love the fact that the soundscape of the festival is as thick and dense, and often competing as it is, so bear with me on this.
Host: [[Background noise continues]] Listen to both me and them. I think it is absolutely possible to listen to more than one thing at a time. And I think that, as people as we all are at this festival, living through difference, and recognizing difference, and being with people who are different from ourselves, that means being able to listen to more than one thing at a time, right? So, you all just did great.
Host: I want to talk about Internment. I want to ask each of our panelists here, if you don't mind. You know, no pressure if you don't want to talk about this, of course. Because these are painful histories, painful memories of- within the J.A. community.
Host: What is your family history with the Internment? And in what ways do you feel it continues to be part of your family history?
Speaker 1: Um, [[clears throat]], I was two years old when I went to Santa Anita Race Track. We were in there with 10,000 other people.
Speaker 1: I don't really remember that much. I have one image of riding on my uncle's shoulders to Mess Hall. You know, we had to eat food that was very unfamiliar to us.
Speaker 1: It was very dusty and I got a big allergy to dust. And also we had to sleep in horse stalls, so I got a big allergy to horse dandruff, as well.
Speaker 1: And so, I just want to say that for Japanese Americans, when we meet each other, one of the first things, one of the things we ask each other was, "What camp were your folks in?" This is like a marker.
Speaker 1: Jerome, Gila, Manzanar, they all, uh, these camps had different personalities or different characters- characteristics.
Speaker 1: Tule Lake, with the people that were more political; tougher.
Speaker 1: So I was actually released. Our family- My father refused to be inducted to the army.
Speaker 1: And we went to- He volunteered to harvest sugar beets in Montana, so we left, and we worked on a work farm.
Speaker 1: So we weren't in a normal concentration camp. And I call it a concentration camp because that's what it was.
Speaker 1: My mom was still in Japan. She was in Hiroshima when the bomb was dropped,
Speaker 1: but she was not in the center, she was out in the country near the side of the mountain.
Speaker 1: My dad was in a concentration camp. He was in one place, then he moved to another camp because he wanted to be with the rest of his brothers.
Speaker 1: Uh, he was at Tule Lake, and then they were asked to sign allegiance, and they're known as no-no boys.
Speaker 1: Where my father signed "No, No", and he was sent to Crystal City in Texas, which was a prison camp.
Speaker 1: Then later on, he had to get his citizenship back because-
Speaker 1: He signed "No No", but now he hangs the United States flag outside his house, so things have changed in his head.
Speaker 2: But Elaine you're saying that at that time, let's hope it was then and not now, it was possible to lose one's citizenship.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And have to through the legal system to reclaim it, to get it back. [[Cross Talk]]
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, uh- [[Cross Talk]]
Speaker 1: Through attorneys, class actions; he got his citizenship back.
Speaker 3: I was born in Manzanar. I was one of, I think, six thousand or so kids that were born in camp. May parents got married got married in Manzar, and that's a very romantic story.
Also, I was a year and a half-old when we left Manzanar, so I have no real memories of it.
Speaker 3: But all my life, you know, whenever you fill out a form you say, "What city were you born?" "Manzanar Relocation Center," is what I had to write.
Speaker 3: Over and over again. So when we hit the 60s, and we were talking about identity, who we are. I'm a Japanese-American citizen, but I was born behind barbed wire.
Speaker 3: So, who am I? You know, am I American, am I Japanese, am I what? You know, uh.
Speaker 3: So, what I did was, I kinda really got into the culture of Japan, and of Japanese-America. My godfather was a teacher of this instrument, and my father played a Biwa, a guitar-like instrument.
Speaker 3: So I grew up in a milieu of artists and musicians. And that's the choice I made; to study who I am.
Speaker 3: So by looking at that, I think, by looking at that we all become stronger to know who we are. When somebody says, "Ching chong Chinaman," I say, "No, I'm Japanese."
Speaker 1: And then it happened to me, you know? And not just, well, God. [[Laughs]]
Speaker 2: My father was in Manzanar, and he had to serve the American Army. He did a dis- not dishonorable discharge, but he, like, had an honorable discharge because he didn't want to go against his people.
Speaker 2: So he kinda like, you know, injured his arm on purpose and his leg just to get out of there. It was, you know, what I thought was great, you know.
Speaker 2: My dad was really angry at the whole thing, and he would never really talk about it. We have a cafe in Little Tokyo called the "Atomic Cafe".
Speaker 2: And in the beginning, we had this sign that says "Atomic," and then there was like a mushroom cloud on top of it, and so, people were saying "that's a little harsh, don't you think?"
Speaker 2: And he says, "Well you know what, I'll take down the cloud, but I'm not gonna take down the name. So it's "Atomic Cafe"."
Speaker 2: And then from that point on, it's so funny how this whole thing happened, 'cause later on in my life, I joined a group called "Hiroshima".
Speaker 2: And so, it's just like my nickname is "Atomic Nancy" because I ran-  my parents ran the "Atomic Cafe".
[Audience member shouts]] What's on your costume?
Speaker 2: Its fireworks. Its Fourth of July bombs, and we do a song called "Simbatsudu", which commemorates, in honor of the atomic bomb.
Speaker 2: So, highly effected, I was behind that, and my parents never really wanted to discuss about camp at all, but I knew there was something stewing, and it was just awful.
Speaker 2: Right? So, if anything, you know, I am glad to be here, and I'm glad you're all able to listen to what we have to say. Thank you.
Speaker 3: So, the camps and how they have affected- Okay, so. So, as I said earlier, I'm a fourth-generation Japanese-American.
Speaker 3: So my grandparents, great grandparents, and great great grandparents were in the camps, while my mother's side; they were in Manzanar, which is in the desert,
Speaker 3: of central, northern side of California, about four hours north of L.A. And on my dad's side, they were at Jerome, which is in the middle of Arkansas.
Speaker 3: So, my dad is an older gentleman, a elder statesman, if you will. So, he was actually in the camps.
Speaker 3: And so I grew up knowing about the camps. I actually grew up though a unique situation, in that my mom was also a Civil Rights Attorney.
Speaker 3: So, I kinda grew up with this shelf of Asian-American literature, and just like language kind of everywhere,
Speaker 3: which is not very common in Japanese-American communities. So I kinda grew up knowing about the camps in pretty good detail for most of my life,
Speaker 3: not fully understanding what they were all about, but knowing that- I remember the first Chapter Book I read was called, "Journeys to Topaz" by Yoshiko Uchida,
Speaker 3: which is about a young girl's trip - a young girl's camping experience. And I remember getting this feeling in the back of my neck. I was probably about six or seven years-old,
Speaker 3: and not truly understanding that feeling when I read it, but knowing that it affected me really deeply. Flash forward to me being thirteen. I had moved to [[?]]; I grew up in Canada.
Speaker 3: I moved to New Jersey when I was thirteen, in August of 2011. Moved to the suburbs of New Jersey, which was forty minutes out of New York, so it was a commuter town for New York. But a month after we moved there, 9-11 happened.
Speaker 3: So, immediately, I am sure many of you remember, immediately, American flags started blooming everywhere.
Speaker 3: So, I became fascinated with American flags 'cause growing up in Canada, you don't have the patriotism you have down here.
Speaker 3: It's kinda like, you know, your proud of beavers and maple syrup; and here it's, like, flags.
Speaker 3: So, it's like, we get here, and immediately there are flags everywhere. And I remember one day counting the flags on the way from our house this location,
Speaker 3: and coming home to dinner saying, "Oh, I counted a hundred and twenty-eight flags," and my mom just being stone-faced.
Speaker 3: And sure, my mom, my mom, the daughter of folks who had been in camp, who has spent her life researching and learning about the camps, was just really deeply affected by that.
Speaker 3: But, I didn't understand that either. A week after 9-11, [[?]] [[?]], a Sikh gas station attendant was killed in Texas. And when I read that, it was the moment I realized what racism was, in practice.
Speaker 3: I had understood the concept of racism, but understand seeing how an event, like a tragedy like 9-11, while we were still mourning those who were dead, we suddenly had to be praying for those who were alive.
Speaker 3: We really had to start worrying about our brothers and sisters who were brown. So, that was the moment that I understood how racism is a practice, and understood what happened in the camps.
Speaker 3: I was able to take this camp experience and apply it to the present day. And from that moment forward, I kinda have used that as a framework to better understand racism on both, on the social level and a systemic level.
Speaker 3: Understanding that it's larger than just, you know, black versus white, versus yellow, versus ,you know, whatever. It's not just about let's segment groups out and see who's -
Speaker 3: There are power dynamics in place, and privilege in place, but there are larger systemic and social structures that we need to break down.
Speaker 3: So the camp experience has really carried on, sso the other end of that on the cultural spectrum, I understand that at that time we were told that my grandmother had an exit interview from the camp, so she left when she was about eighteen years-old.
Speaker 3: And a FBI Agent who interviewed her and did her check to see if she was fit to be back in American society, checked-  Told her when you out there not to speak Japanese, don't practice any Japanese culture; don't do any of those things.
Speaker 3: So, and anybody who left the camps got that lecture, basically.  And so we were essentially the victims of cultural genocide, at that moment.
Speaker 3: And so for us to reclaim it in this way is a very radial act. It's a political act. I see this political act, and so that's why I play the instrument I do. That's why I hang out with these folks, and I speak Japanese, even though my parents don't.
Speaker 3: And so we're in a process now, three generations later- two generations later, reclaiming something that was taken from us.
Speaker 1: Wow! right! I hope you see now why I ask the question, if you mean Japanese-Americans from the west coast, whether it's Washington, Oregon, or California.
Speaker 1: Probably the internment is part of their family's story.
Speaker 1: It's part- It's important to understand that. And I was much struck by the ways in which several of our panelists were using very strong language to talk about what happened.
Speaker 1: It's been a long process across many decades and generations to use terms like concentration camp rather than, you know, internment camp or relocation center, right? Or to use words like cultural genocide.
Speaker 1: I don't know. Our understanding, our consciousness is always changing and moving right?
Speaker 1: And I think our political understanding of those years is, as well. I just briefly want to say that if you ever want to visit Manzanar, which is now a national park,
Speaker 1: I would absolutely say go, go; it's in the middle of nowhere, but it's an extraordinary place.
Speaker 1: And a particularly important day to go, if you could manage it, is the last Saturday every April, when the annual pilgrimage to Manzanar takes place.
Speaker 1: Organized by Japanese Americans. It's a day-long event that includes,
Speaker 1: ritual, music, memory, and since 9/11, they have included Muslim Americans, very self consciously and intentionally, in the middle of it, just so they can talk about what it means to have civil liberties violated.
Speaker 2: I just wanna say one thing in addition to Sean's very right-on remarks is that
Speaker 2: the experience of being in a concentration camp in America has really helped us understand the experience of Black Americans, of Native Americans.
Speaker 2: If it weren't for the fact that we were treated this way, I think we would be a less compassionate and political people.
Speaker 2: For myself, because I have a black family, and because my son is Muslim, 9/11 particularly had a very scary effect on me and still, the-
Speaker 1: what's going on world wide Muslims and Islamophobia has a very vivid effect on my life so actually helps to expand our consciousness and sensitivity to what is going on around us today.
Speaker 2: I realize we only have six minutes left, something like that, um, very quickly, Tori, I want to talk a little about you know the Arabs performance the way in which this becomes so central to these amazing panelists' experience and and um, exploration of Japanese American identity and I also want to make sure that you have a chance to ask questions about um because in a way you can see us do what we do over there you know today and tomorrow for sure if you haven't already.  Do any of you have questions?  Do any of you have questions?  Yes sir.  Let's answer your question.
Speaker 3: I grew up in the 40s and we were told that there was a great danger of the West Coast Japanese being on the side of Japan and hurting the United States.  Were we told the truth or were we told lies?
Speaker 4: The West Coast of the United States has a long history of racism directed towards Orientals, first the Chinese, right, the railroad workers.  The Chinese helped the railroads reach prominently points and that the whole story went on about that.  Japanese also worked on the railroads and and came as laborers actually as like in Hawaii as plantation workers.  They came to the United States under contracts, the bondage kinda contracts, um, but to get to the point of you know I mean they said it was for our own good to protect us right?  That there would be hangings and things like that well how come the machine guns were pointed in?  Not out there were machine guns towers at Manismark but the machine guns were pointed in.  You understand what I am saying?  Uh it was just the worst newspapers did, you know, the daughters of the American Revolution, the Grange, it was partly about greed it was taking over the land that Japanese Americans had taken land and dug up stones and trees and made this very poor agricultural land into a very productive land and if it weren't for that California wouldn't have its agro-business that it has
Speaker 1: You know, and it was a land grab part of that story. It was a land grab.  Yup.
Speaker 2: There, there was also yellow journalism, so there were images of us in very uncomplimentary caricatures - buck teeth, and slanted eyes, and it's callings us the yellow peril.
Speaker 2: So it was a great preparation leading up to this moment of 1942, and it's a convenience, really, that Japan dropped the bomb on Hiroshima, I mean, in Pearl Harbor it became an excuse to execute, to do executive order 9022.
Speaker 3: Also more concretely, and this isn't like a conspiracy theory, as they say, prior, in 1940, I believe, the US government commission was called the "Munsin Report",
Speaker 3: and it was essentially a survey to check the loyalty of Japanese-Americans, so there were workers in the CIA ,I believe, in the Japanese-American community observing.
Speaker 3: And that report came out and said that Japanese-Americans were actually a little bit too loyal, like it was, like, they were trying so, like, they were trying so hard to be American that they were, like, there was absolutely no danger at all.
Speaker 3: Then once Pearl Harbor happened, that's when executive order 9066 happened.
Speaker 4: Hello, I don't know if you guys talked about this earlier, but how do you guys feel about the US dropping two bombs on Japan.
Speaker 4: Do you feel like there were any other options, or do you think that's the most we could've done?
Speaker 3: That is a very complex question.  Um, I think that it will, obviously, we are not speaking on behalf of anybody, but ourselves.
Speaker 3: For me, personally, I don't know enough about the politics of the time to fully understand the ramifications.
Speaker 3: Um, I do think that an atomic bomb is never necessary.
Speaker 3: Um, I also think that wartime in general is I think it is larger than just the bomb.
Speaker 3: I think it goes back to a history of colonization, and I think it goes back to history of Manifest Destiny,
Speaker 3: and I think it goes back to a lot of things that led to a moment where a choice is made.
Speaker 3: I don't if I can certainly say what the black or white, "Yes or No", is on that.
Speaker 3: But personally, I like to look at the logical picture, and I like to think about,
Speaker 1: You know, Japan was a country that was closed, and then America came and demanded trade agreements with guns pointed at Tokyo.
Speaker 1: And then Japan saw that as a threat, and chose to militarize.
Speaker 1: And so, at that moment you have one-upping, one-upping, one-upping because they were seeing how Europe was colonizing the rest of Asia.
Speaker 1: Um, and so you sorta have this moment where it just becomes, "Alright, let's see. They're doing something bad, so we're gonna do something bad,"
Speaker 1: "so they're gonna do something bad, so we're gonna do something bad." It just keeps getting worse, and worse, and worse.
Speaker 1: And then you have what's happening in the Middle East right now.
Speaker 1: So this is something that's ongoing, and I think it's at a moment where its hard to look at isolated incidents and say, "This was right or wrong," because there's so many layers beyond that.
Speaker 2: Japan was ready to, to give up before, before, and they knew that they were ready to give up the war.
Speaker 2: And they still dropped the bomb, which I had heard they wanted to see the result of what the bomb would do
Speaker 2: So Hiroshima was a very controlled- It was - It's surrounded by mountains, and they could measure the result of what the bomb could do.
Speaker 2: So- I don't know how-  Have any of you been to Hiroshima? So you saw that space. Really shocking!
Speaker 2: Uh-- and of course, her relatives- My relative was killed in Nagasaki.
Speaker 2: So, there were two different kinds of landscapes that they experimented on dropping. They could've dropped it anywhere,
Speaker 2: but these are the places that they, uh-
[SILENCE]
Speaker 3: I hate to stop, but we do have to. Um, I should say that in half an hour, at 1:15, we are going to perform over in the Sounds of California Tent
Speaker 3: Please join us. What we do is intentional, and beautiful, and joyous.
Speaker 3: But, here's the thing that you need to know, is that these stories inform what you are going to see in FandangObon.
Speaker 3: Let me also close by saying that, coming to consciousness, as we say in Ethnic Studies, coming to political consciousness, may happen at a particular moment.
Speaker 3: For me, I had a great moment when I first heard "A Grain of Sand," the album that Noboko, and Charlie Chin, and Chris Hijima recorded in 1973,
Speaker 3: that came to consciousness as an Asian-American, and listening to that, that album.
Speaker 3: However, I would also say that "coming to consciousness" is a process that goes on, and on.
Speaker 3: So, Thank you for coming and helping on our continued efforts to come to consciousness.
Speaker 3: Join us over at FandangObon in half an hour, and be part of that bigger project.
Speaker 3: Thank you so much for being a great audience. Thank you for sharing your stories. [[Applause]]
Speaker 3: [[Third Speaker]] Thank you so much to [[?]] [[?]] for sharing your- your stories and insights with us.
Speaker 3: Our next session starts right at 1 o'clock. Uh we'll have the American Immigration Council speaking with some DREAMERS.
Uh, while you're waiting for the next session, please take the opportunity to visit one or the other of our red boards to map your own immigration experiences.